German Chancellor Olaf Schultz has
become the first major world leader to
visit Israel since hamas's deadly
attacks in a joint press conference with
Israel's prime minister Benjamin
Netanyahu Chancellor Schultz warned
Regional Powers not to get involved
militarily in the conflict saying the
war must not escalate and spread
throughout the Middle East the
chancellor also stressed what he called
Germany's special responsibility to
support Israel following the Nazi era
Holocaust in which some 6 million Jews
were
murdered the Israeli Prime Minister
compared hamas's terror attack to those
crimes 80 years ago our people
experienced the worst savagery in the
history of humanity with the Nazi crimes
against the Jewish people on the soil of
Germany and
Europe I must tell you my friend that
the savagery that we witnessed
perpetrated by the Hamas
murderers uh coming out of Gaza were the
worst crimes committed against Jews
since the
Holocaust and here is what Germany's
chancellor had to
say the security of Israel and its
citizens is German reason of State the
German government acts according to this
principle and is supported in this by
Parliament across the party
Spectrum it is important for me to say
this today in this difficult time in all
clarity
Germany's history our historic
responsibility originating from the
Holocaust makes it our duty to protect
the existence and security of
Israel let's talk more about this with
DW's Chief political editor Mela kufner
who has been following that pressor hi
Michaela um both Schultz and Netanyahu
mentioning and invoking the Holocaust
that feels um deeply important can you
tell us what you made of their comments
just now yeah yes it was a historical
moment whatever comes next um here we
see the country who just suffered the
largest loss of Jewish life since that
Holocaust and um the today's Chancellor
of the nation that were the perpetrators
of the Holocaust uh standing together
against Hamas and it was a very striking
parallel from Benyamin Netanyahu there
that he basically refer to Hamas as the
new Nazis as a Reincarnation of the
Islamic State putting it into more
contemporary uh reference there and
Germany's response has been since that
uh attack by Hamas but this was now
delivered in person by the German
Chancellor that the security of Israel
is Germany's
um it is the fundamental principle of
the German State and um this is
something Olaf Schultz as the first
major leader visiting here wants to
breathe life into also by assuring
Israel that if it requires assist
Germany will be someone who looks at you
know whatever they need and will be
eager to provide assistance as required
so we got a small peek into what the two
leaders spoke about before that press
conference um Schulz said that he spoke
to Netanyahu about how to get
humanitarian Aid to civilians in the
besiege Gaza Strip and that he was going
to raise the topic with Egypt's
President as well what should what would
you make of those comments I think this
gives us an idea of the coordinates of
um Germany's role um as a a country that
is keeping channels of communication
open with everyone and trying to ensure
Israel um uh being safe by talking to um
to leaders who can allow for
humanitarian assistance because the
major challenge is actually to get
humanitarian assistance into Gaza we saw
OA feline the EU commission president
announced that there would be um flights
uh out of Egypt into Gaza this is still
very unclear how this would technically
actually take place um but also the
German Chancellor while assuring Israel
that it will ST stand by its side um
basically calling on Israel um to um
prevent unnecessary loss of life not in
as many words but by really drawing
attention to the humanitarian situation
that is basically epitomized the
suffering that is taking place in Gaza
as we speak at this moment in time yeah
now of course there's been a lot of
concern about Regional spillover um from
this conflict but I thought one thing
that was noticeable for the fact that it
wasn't mentioned in this press
conference were the names Iran and
Hezbollah why do you think that they
didn't bring them up here yeah it's
interesting that the German CH chose not
to call them out uh previously also
there was a German French meeting
between him and Emmanuel MCO and
Emmanuel mcco briefly tweeted or exed um
a a message that included Iran it was
was then deleted so um here you see
Germany the Europeans treading very
cautiously but he did clearly mean Iran
and Hezbollah out of Lebanon and the
immediate threat of course being
Hezbollah joining and turning this into
a conflict where Israel has to fight two
different fronts here and that is
something the German Chancellor wants to
help prevent and that's also why we see
him travel on and he clearly more than
hinted at many calls that he's already
made so this was a hugely symbolic
moment historic moment you've called it
I'm curious if we know what kind of
actual support Israel can now expect uh
from Germany after this trip by Schultz
okay well quite clearly this this pledge
of political support uh but what we do
know is that Germany leased two drones
uh from Israel which were supposed to be
transferred to Germany at some point in
time they will now remain where they are
that is a form of assistance then
initially there was a request from the
Israelis for ammunition for some of
their Navy ships and they've since
basically cancelled that and it seems
that the Israelis rely much more on
concrete assistance from the Americans
with whom they sh share a lot more um
defense systems so uh that doesn't seem
to be the case for now but clearly we've
heard the German Chancellor say time and
time again that he is checking in with
Benyamin Netanyahu time and time again
on what assistance Germany May provide
and it has already provided um medical
equipment and medical material so far
qat has taken on a role as mediator in
the war between Hamas and Israel Doha
has had ties with Hamas since its early
days this gives it an important position
of influence over what the EU us and
some Arab states label a terrorist group
but it also brings into question how
appropriate Qatar is as a mediator for
peace
talks no a friend to the west and to
their sworn enemies katar walks a tight
rope on foreign policy doha's
communication Channels with Hamas have
made it a major International player and
an important us and EU
Ally a small state with a long history
of mediation as in past flareups Doha
this time immediately took on the role
of negotiator holding talks for the
release of hostages held in Gaza CA cut
diplomatic ties with Israel in 2009 but
it is experienced at balancing Rel with
opposing players for example counting
both Teran and Washington as
friends Doha has hosted the political
headquarters of Hamas for more than a
decade over the weekend the political
leader of the militant islamist group
Ismael Hana met with Iran's foreign
minister in
Doha qat is also widely regarded as a
major financial backer of Hamas through
its funding of civil services in Gaza it
says the the financial support is for
humanitarian and political efforts to
maintain stability and support gazen
families Doha has tried to use monetary
incentives to find diplomatic Solutions
in past conflicts Qatari leaders say
their priority now is to deescalate
protect civilians and to prevent any
spillover that could trigger a regional
War now US President Joe Biden is
preparing to head to Israel on Wednesday
day um earlier we also know that the
German Chancellor uh excuse me that the
chancellor met with King Abdullah in
Berlin we know that the leaders there
discussed the humanitarian situation in
the Gaza Strip and also how to prevent
further escalation between Israel and
Hamas in Gaza the Jordanian leader also
warned against Palestinian refugees
being pushed into Egypt or Jordan uh
calling this a red
line and the Jordanian King stressed the
need for Aid to alleviate the suffering
of civilians on both sides but he said
the humanitarian issue must be dealt
with inside Gaza and the West
Bank that is a red line uh because I
think that is the plan by certain of The
Usual Suspects to try and create de
facto issues on the ground no refugees
in Jordan no refugees in Egypt this is a
situation of humanarian Dimension that
has to be dealt inside of Raza and uh
and and the West Bank and not to try and
push the Palestinian Challenge and their
future onto other people's shoulders I'm
joined Now by DW senior International
correspondent funny faar from Tel Aviv
funny this is a very difficult position
for Israel isn't it um how can Israel
ensure the safety of these hostages in
Gaza while it is also bombing the
territory Israel is facing a huge
dilemma their aim is is to root out
Hamas militants they keep saying but at
the same time they're confronted with
the fact that Hamas but a vast tunnel
system we're talking about an
underground city basically of 400
kilomet long tunnels and the entrances
to these tunnels are close to schools
close to hospitals in a very densely
populated area and in that tunnel system
now are not only the militants and the
people who support them but also
apparently also the hostages and and
this is the Dilemma that Israel is
facing now they did say that everyone
who can basically shall leave the
northern part of Gaza towards the South
a forced a uation basically but that
itself poses a huge danger for
Palestinians for the people who need to
leave now because once they are trying
to leave they either lack fuel so a lot
of people are trying to leave from the
north to the south on foot but once they
get to the South what is going to happen
to them the only opening to the world
that could become an opening is the
rougher border crossing with Egypt but
that remains closed and yes we do hear
that the US and Israel are talking about
somewh trying to create so-called safe
zones in the South but also trying to
get Aid in but at this point there's
nothing precise about these plans and
things are getting worse by the hour for
the people as these talks are ongoing so
urgently uh there is there the UN is
calling for a to get in and obviously
the people who are protesting here
behind me are calling for the release of
those
hostages yes um as we've seen it's not
just Israelis there are also many
foreigners among the hostages what kind
of role are foreign governments playing
here in trying to secure their release
well first and foremost they're coming
here to Israel to uh Express their
solidarity and at the same time trying
to gather some intelligence trying to
get some information actually who in the
region not only here in Israel but in
other countries be uh uh Qatar for
example Saudi Arabia who in the region
can help to negotiate with Hamas
militants and try to help release those
hostages for example Qatar already
offered its help very early on since
October 7th uh because obviously Qatar
being one of the main financial backer
of hamus militants have very close
contacts contact with with with the
terrorist organization the question is
though whether whether they will be able
to help and release those hostages
before a potential ground offensive
starts or any offensive because as we
hearing the one of the spokesperson of
IDF is saying now it doesn't necessarily
actually have to be a ground offensive
it could be anything else so there are a
lot of things that are that remain
unclear so is it remains unclear what is
happening exactly right now with those
hostages that are trapped just like the
Palestinian people in Gaza trip and
Finny uh US President Joe Biden arriving
in Israel tomorrow what can we expect
from his
trip to reaffirm solidarity us
solidarity with Israel something that
obviously US Secretary of State Biden
but also US Secretary of State blinkin
uh excuse me has has done on his Middle
East Tour it keeps continuing as well as
the US Secretary of of of Defense who's
been here in Israel as well but also
obviously that visit that expected visit
by President Biden here in Israel is
another way to show deterrence making
sure that for example the hisbah
militants in Lebanon but also that Iran
do not get involved to make sure there's
deescalation here before the conflict
may be widening let's get more from a
geopolitical strategist I am joined Now
by Fel
chakarova German Chancellor Olaf Schultz
in Israel today and we know US President
Joe Biden is due to arrive on Wednesday
what do you think they will be pushing
for and how effective will they
be thank you for the invitation well
first of course the German Chancellor is
going to um meet the Israeli leadership
to show actually solidarity not only on
behalf of Germany but in General on
behalf of uh European Union member
states
uh there are German hostages so he will
also meet families of those who have
been taken hostage uh now of course what
is also important from German
perspective is going to be the
discussion on humanitarian Aid and uh
preventing humanitarian uh catastrophe
uh when it comes to the visit of the
American uh president uh here of course
we have a very very different agenda
which is more geopolitical one first and
foremost showing of course support uh
including Military Support with the
aircraft carriers uh uh in the
Mediterranean uh which is to prevent any
further escalation but of course right
now all the efforts are focused on
preventing ground defensive preventing
actually of another let's say
longlasting War where other key players
in the region may see actually an
incentive to get involved key word for
you of course Iran so here all of the
American efforts right now are to on the
one hand show of course support and
solidarity uh for the key partner in the
region Israel but on the other hand also
to get engaged with all the relevant
actors to also prevent this cast
catastrophe from happening uh third
important point is of course to also
make sure that there will be
humanitarian uh corridors uh for the
Palestinian people right now all the
neighbors uh the key neighbors that
could actually take more refugees are um
have closed doors for different reasons
so Egypt Jordan but we also have the
situation in the north with Lebanon
where there is a risk of actually
another escalation and second front so a
lot of problems on the agenda a lot of
issues and as I said we still have um
let's say uh good uh uh perspective for
actually preventing this war from
happening yeah so how worried are you
about potential spillover in the region
then do you think that diplomacy can
prevent it from becoming embroiled in a
wider
War well first and foremost from my
perspective this has been the most uh
optimistic uh context Regional context
for most of the actors involved prior to
what Hamas actually has conducted in
terms of the most severe terrorist
attack on civil Ian in the in the modern
history of Israel so before this attack
most of the actors in the region have
been already engaging in various um
multifaceted uh
normalization processes and diplomatic
economic and so on ties so in fact
nobody really wants a war right now if
we take a look at the agenda of most of
the actors even Iran was engaging with
Saudi Arabia on the one hand think of of
the broker deal by China but also with
the United States and think of the
potential for Iran deal 2.0 so even Iran
is not really incentivized to start a
war but right now we in a very delicate
situation because of the escalatory
trajection of this uh conflict and this
is where uh some actors may see an
incentive to further escalate and this
is what United States is trying to
prevent right now so all the key players
United States China and even Russia
don't want a war yes we may argue Russia
would be uh interested in having some
kind of military tensions to draw the
attention away from Eastern Europe and
from Ukraine and then all the regional
players on the ground including Israel
have been actually working proactively
on normalizing relations so I still have
let's say more optimistic scenario for
uh preventing the worst which would be
of course ground offense and then of
course we don't know for sure what the
cascading effects would be from a ground
offensive and in terms of the
humanitarian disaster thank you so much
for joining us with that that is
geopolitical strategist of Alina
chakarova we really appreciate your time
today thank you very
much